Understanding BruegelThe Road to Calvary: A New Perspective of the Windmill
Pieter Bruegel was one of the most important artists of the Northern Renaissance, creating works that reflected both the Flemish tradition and the styles of Hieronymus Bosch and Bruegel’s contemporaries. We know very little about him, as there is virtually no documentation covering his life. The precious few details we do have come mainly from Karl van Mander’s Schilder-Boeck, and much of this is hotly contested. He was probably born sometime between 1528 and 1530, most likely in a city, and died in Brussels in 1569, around the age of forty. He was a pupil of Claude Dorizi and also possibly an apprentice of Pieter Coecke van Aelst, and his entire career spanned a mere 16 years. Vasari may have heralded him as a “second Bosch”, referring to Hieronymous Bosch, the prolific Dutch painter, due to his heavy influence on several of Bruegel’s works, but Bruegel did have his own distinct style. He developed his own personal way of showing figures in grotesque forms, and often used alienating techniques to make his paintings more impersonal and more of an observational than an interactive work.The Road to Calvary (Fig. 1), dated 1564 (also known as Way to Calvary and Procession to Calvary), is by far his largest work, at about 4 feet by 5 and a half feet. It is also his busiest, containing about 200 figures and primarily depicting the moment when Jesus falls while carrying the crucifix and Saint Simon is drawn from the crowd to help carry Jesus’ cross. All other figures in the painting are basically soldiers, spectators, or saints. The subject matter is not something very new; in fact it is commonly seen in Renaissance art. What we do know of this painting’s history is that it was originally owned by a banker named Nicolas Jonghelink, and was at some later date also used as security on a loan (there is a deed to this effect in the city archives), and then going into the possession of the city of Antwerp to be later presented to Rudolph II, ending up in Vienna’s Kunsthistorisches Museum. Unfortunately, such a painting would not have been viewed by the public, as it was commissioned by a private patron, and did not enter into common knowledge of Bruegel’s works until the advent of modern copying technology. Prior to this, Bruegel was known primarily for his drawings and etchings, which were made “for the people”.Bruegel’s style in this work is not unlike his usual manner, and his inspiration for the composition would appear to lie in other Northern Renaissance artists’ depictions of the same subject. Take, for instance, Herri met de Bles’ The Road to Calvary (Fig. 2) from 1535, in which we see a similar arcing procession moving around a rock formation with Christ not in the foreground, but somewhere in the middle. A similar composition is seen in Cornelis Massys’ Kreuztragung (Fig. 3) in 1540, where the colour palette seems to be closer to that of Bruegel’s depiction. Other important paintings that Bruegel must have looked at include Pieter Aertsen’s Procession to Calvary from 1552, as well as the anonymous Brunswick Monogrammist’s The Way to Calvary, whose significance I will explain later.All these works share the same circular procession, the presence of a central rock or tree formation that may seem like a strange addition, and a lack of special focus on the figure of Jesus Christ, fallen with his crucifix over him. All of these also have the Virgin Mary somewhere in the painting, weeping and mourning with several other Saints or apostles. Bruegel keeps many of these elements for his work, reflecting the style and tradition of his Flemish predecessors and peers. What he does differently than previous artists is the positioning of the figures of the Christ and the Holy mourners. Bruegel puts Jesus right in the middle of the painting, giving him more importance than previous Northern Renaissance artists did, and also brings the normally background figures of the Virgin, St. John and the other mourners right to the forefront of the painting. He uses these individuals to set the tone of the painting, and to create a rather dichotomy between the weeping Holy mourners and the people surrounding them—who are really very far away, but in the painting appear just next to the larger sad figures—showing the indifference and obliviousness of man on such a crucial, life-changing day. To add to this, the Holy figures are also dressed very differently than everyone else. However, before I get into the nature of the characters of the work, I shall first look at formal elements of the composition.The mix of colours in the painting makes the whole scene seem very confusing and muddled, with the Earth a mixture of reds, greens, browns and yellows. The colours can also be approximately classed into horizontal bands, starting at the top with a blue and white sky, turning to a yellow muddy landscape, transitioning downward to the procession itself, in which the red coats of the soldiers stand out, and then further down to the green and brown grass and mud of the land. The figures themselves are easily identifiable by the colours and clothes they wear- the soldiers all have distinctive bright red coats while the spectators are clad mostly in black and other dark colours. All these people are dressed in a contemporary style, suggesting a scene in Bruegel’s Netherlands. The holy family and friends are dressed in a completely different manner, multicoloured and in clothing that would seem more appropriate for the time of the crucifixion. Christ himself is dressed in a blue robe, a colour Bruegel reserves for Jesus and very few other seemingly random individuals in the crowd. Having Christ in blue suggests a sort of divine royalty to me, which is also seen in the fact that the Virgin Mary has a blue headscarf.
At first glance, the melee of figures and tones makes it very difficult to spot the fallen Christ, despite the fact that he is placed exactly in the centre of the painting. The effect created is very interesting; Bruegel has gone to great pains to ensure that Jesus is well-hidden yet in plain sight. It is very hard to find him, but once you do, it is impossible to lose sight of him. Bruegel uses a few tricks to prevent us from immediately seeing Christ (Fig. 4); just below him is a large white horse with a white-clad rider. This is an easy distraction for the eye to follow, and is what my eye instantly jumps to when I look at this painting. The rider himself looks to his left, as do several people around him, which somewhat guides me to look in the direction they are. When I look to their left, I see the scene with St. Simon being pulled out of the crowd. The line of individuals that Simon is a part of goes diagonally upwards and to the right, so my eye is led next in this direction, which finally takes me to the centre of the work, where I find Christ falling with his cross.“Thus one looks at Christ Carrying the Cross, for example, as if one did not know which particular carrying of a cross is depicted. Bruegel’s picture shows, so to speak, the sociological aspect of public martyrdom as it could happen at any time, even in the present”It is in the nature of paintings of the Northern Renaissance artists, including Bruegel, to have no special focus on the subject of the painting. The viewer has to take in an entire landscape and many other individuals while trying to focus on the ‘main’ character. The idea behind this seems to be that there is no reason to give the subject of the painting any more importance than any other individual in the world around him or her. This is in drastic contrast to the flatter, more focused images one sees in Italian Renaissance works, such as Raphael’s Christ Falling on the Way to Calvary (Fig. 5), where the main figures are that of Christ, the Virgin, his companions, Saint Simon and a few soldiers. The viewer’s attention, together with the attentions of all the figures in the painting, is generally drawn towards one or two characters in Italian art.In Bruegel’s Road to Calvary, virtually no one is interested in looking at Jesus Christ—most spectators seem more interested in finding their way to the site of the scheduled executions. To them, this day is no more special than any other day on which criminals are crucified, and Bruegel shows that this is the case by having many people simply disinterested and trundling along, while others still are playing in the mud. These people’s lives do not revolve around Jesus, and the way we happen upon him in this painting is similar to how any given stranger in the procession might find him- with difficulty, and that too only if they were looking for him. Bruegel’s other works, such as Landscape with the Fall of Icarus and Temptation of St. Anthony, also display this seeming disregard for the special importance subject of the painting, but the subject usually finds himself in some insignificant corner of the painting. Road to Calvary is very different in that Christ is found in the exact centre, as this shows that Bruegel does want to place some importance on his subject, at least more so than in his other works.One point one of my readings on this work briefly mentioned was the idea of the painting being split in half, each side representing either life or death:“Whatever is to our left, in all the familiar representations of the Last Judgement, is to the right of the Sovereign Judge, on the side of Paradise. Our side is consequently to his left. On the side of Hell.”Gibson suggests that everything on the left side of the painting is “alive” or “happy”, while the right is “dead” or “sorrowful”. Upon looking closely at the work, I can definitely see some value in this idea. There are several clear indications of such a division of the painting. For instance, the mood of the sky changes from left to right; it goes from bright and sunny to dark and stormy. While in the top-left of the painting we have what appears to be a quaint Flemish town, the top-right is the site of the impending execution. We could see the town as a source of life, while the barren site on the right brings nothing but death. The scenery behind the town also extends off into the horizon, giving the impression of endlessness, and that a future exists for those in the town. The horizon above the execution site, on the other hand, hits the dark skyline abruptly, emphasising that it is the end of the line: there is nothing beyond this.Vertical lines on either side of the composition create a frame for it. The left-side line comes from a tree in the prime of its life, looking as though it would fit better in a springtime paradisiacal landscape than a procession to a crucifixion. The right side frame is created by a torture-and-death wheel from which condemned prisoners would have bee hung to be devoured by crows and vultures. This represents death not only in the sense that it brings death to its victims, but also in that the wheel sits atop a long trunk of wood, which is the dead form of the thriving tree on the left side of the painting. Other aspects of the good-evil divide can be seen at the bottom of the work, where on the left side we see leaves and branches, whereas on the bottom-right we see the skull of a horse. We also see children playing in the mud on the left side, while on the right we have the grieving Virgin and other mourners.One very odd element of the Road to Calvary is the addition of a windmill on top of a massive finger of rock towards the back of the painting. This is apparently a modification of the so-called Brunswick Monogrammist’s The Way to Calvary, in which a disproportionately large church tower can be seen in the distance. What is immediately apparent form looking at the painting is that the entire procession is moving around the mill in a manner that is clockwise to a bird’s-eye view observer. Everything seems to turn around the mill, including the ground immediately around it, which makes it seem as though the rock the mill is on sits in a crater of sorts. Even the rock formations at the bottom of the composition form a circular arc, dipping from sight in the middle of the painting.The movement of the procession may not seem like much, but the fact of the matter is that the mill and the rock it sits on form the fulcrum of the giant “wheel” of people moving around it. The connection I can draw here involves that of the mill being a giant turning device, and that the moving of a grindstone is its entire purpose. Just as the mill must turn, so must the procession inevitably rotate around it. The inevitability of death applies overwhelmingly to Christ, and no matter how much he falls and how much he struggles to get to it, he will eventually reach the site of his crucifixion. This idea of inevitability may also be relevant to all the people in the scene, as it may signify that they must travel from the town, the source of life, around to their deaths at their own ending points, represented by the execution are in the top-right.Gibson claims that the mill serves several other purposes, including that of a “weather vane”. He claims that the figure at the bottom of the painting, directly below the mill, is a peddler who, in the art of this period, represented Protestantism. The mill itself is a modification of a church tower in a previous work, and the wings of the windmill look like a cross, so altogether it represents the Christian religion. Additionally, since it sits atop an extremely tall rock, it could serve as a weather vane, so it could serve as a device to show the direction in which the winds of favour blow for the church. In Bruegel’s day, this would have meant distaste for a corrupt institution, and his animosity towards such a church is further represented in his use of red Spanish army uniforms instead of Roman soldiers’ clothing.Another possible explanation posited by Gibson is that of “Bruegel the cosmographer”. As it turns out, Bruegel considered himself a man who knew a thing or two about stars, constellations and the movements of the heavenly bodies. There has been a belief through the ages, particularly in Roman times, that there was a “heavenly mill” that “caused destiny to shimmer down on peoples’ heads like some fine powder, ground out of substances unknown”. This belief was based in the phenomenon known as the Precession of the Equinoxes, which a fancy term for the change of the tilt of the Earth’s axis. The axis of the Earth is always at a tilt, but sometimes it is tilted more than at other times. This cycle of axis wobble has a period of about 26000 years, and myth told that this cycling caused the rises and falls of the world. People used the allegory of a “heavenly mill” to describe this myth, with seven oxen continuously turning the cosmic mill wheel. Bruegel undoubtedly knew of the Precession of the Equinoxes and the myth of the cosmic mill wheel, and Gibson proposes that Bruegel places the mill in such an important place in the painting because the coming of Christ embodies an extremely important change in the universe: the end of the power of the mill.The idea was that all ancient beliefs tended to involve humans subject to the will of some fates that were “causal forces”. The Christian belief system, according to Gibson, lifted mankind to a level beyond these causal forces; man was brought above nature. Bruegel shows us the mill because Christianity brings us “the definitive decline of the mindless causal power embodied in the mill”.While I am not willing to completely rule out the possibility that the first idea of Gibson’s is correct, I do not consider to be as likely as the second to be a valid explanation for the level of importance placed on the mill by Bruegel. I also think that what I said earlier is still applicable - that the inevitability of death is also something Bruegel is trying to put across here. The fates may shower down destiny upon us, but they also guide us steadily towards the ends of our lives. The procession from the town, birth, to the crucifix, death, could be seen as the path of life that we must all take, and our destiny in the meantime is controlled by the towering mill and is grindstone, churning our fate out onto us. I believe I can also expand on the ideas put forth about the mill and the end of the “mythic power of astral fate”. If one is to combine the concept of the left-right life-death divide with that of the heavenly mill, we see that the mill and its rock sit on the left side of the painting, meaning that the mill lies on the side of life. What does this mean for our analysis of the “cosmic mill wheel”?As far as I can tell, Bruegel does not seem to be much of an optimist when it comes to matters like this, so I doubt that what he is trying to say is that the heavenly mill grinds out mostly positive destiny with only a small amount of bad stuff. He may simply have placed it there because he wanted to preserve the compositional structure of the work by the Brunswick Monogrammist. Another possibility is that he knew he had to take a position on previous religious and mythical belief structures with the placement of the mill, and placing it on the right side of the painting was too negative a stance (I say this as we do not know what his true religious, political or moral affiliation was). Placing the mill in the middle would put it in the same vertical line as Christ, and that would mean drawing some sort of equivalence between the Christian God and pagan Gods. While Bruegel does not seem pleased with the religious establishment, it is unlikely he would have drawn such a blasphemous connection between Christ and the Roman Gods.I see another possible answer to the meaning of the positioning of the mill, in line with Bruegel’s style and with some meaning attached, as well. If you look at the Road to Calvary simply as a series of shapes and lines, and look for well-defined divisions in the composition, you will notice that there is a line that stretches from the right side horizon leftward, then dips, arcs under the rock and mill, rises again, then dips once more as it reaches the left edge of the painting. Similarly, the upper edge of the procession creates a large, sweeping arc across the canvas. We also have a small circle in the upper-right corner, where people have gathered to watch the crucifixion. Combine these three elements and I am convinced you can see a face in the painting, looking towards the sky with an open mouth. This is easier to see if we turn the piece on its side (Fig. 6). The face then looks like it is trying to (or is about to) eat the heavenly mill.This is not an unusual symbolic act for Bruegel, and is reminiscent of the eating in his earlier Big Fish Eat Little Fish drawing (Fig. 7), and of the face with the open mouth in the background of his Mad Meg (Fig. 8). This is also something very typical of Hieronymous Bosch, who sometimes used scenery and smaller characters in his compositions to construct just such eating-type scenes. This concept did not die out in Bruegel’s time, either, evidenced by Jackson Pollock’s use of an almost opposite image in Going West, where the sky looks like a face trying to eat the mountains.What this “eating” may imply is pretty much in line with the idea of Christ coming to free man of the chains of causal forces. Jesus and man are of the Earth, which is swallowing the heavenly mill, meaning that it is taking over the realm of something that used to lie beyond its power. Humanity, the realm of the mortals, is about to swallow whole the tower of the cosmic windmill which controlled them for so long, and one can almost picture the next scene, when Christ gets to the crucifixion site: He reaches the “eye” of the Earth, and helps humanity see the Christian way of life. At that moment, one can imagine the finger of rock holding the windmill up beyond the reach of humanity collapsing downward into the waiting “mouth” below it, then taken under the surface where it no longer has any hold over the fates of men.This is largely conjecture on my part, as none of the literature I have read thus far on the painting has hinted at the idea of the “face”, and it is possible that the image I see is nothing more than a coincidental arrangement of shapes and lines. That said, I believe the use of such a face in the landscape would not be completely out of character for Bruegel, and hope that my added interpretation of the concept of the windmill is of some worth. The work as a whole is extremely complex, to a degree I would consider unprecedented. Virtually every object and individual in the Road to Calvary has been analysed and dissected by art historians and philosophers looking for the real meaning behind some of the more bizarre inclusions in Bruegel’s masterpiece, and one cannot help but marvel at the multiple layers of meaning cast on this canvas, in a manner undoubtedly perfected through years of painting depictions of proverbs and folk tales. The precise meaning of this painting will continue to be the subject of debate for years to come, and I’m not sure there will ever be consensus, simply because of Bruegel’s depth.